pages=147
===== PAGE 101 =====
4 Three-dimensional self-assembled metamaterials 96
hide three-dimensional, free-standing objects at optical wavelengths [299].
Magnetic dipole resonances in meta-atoms had been previously realized by top-down tech-
niques, e.g., in the case of a SRR. However, the results of this chapter have to be seen as one
important step that further improved the ﬁeld of self-assembled MMs. The demonstration
of a magnetic response for meta-atoms made of resonant NPs, as they typically appear for a
bottom-up fabrication, entails an extensive advantage. It serves as the ﬁrst step to fabricate
fully three-dimensional MMs with a tailored optical response as they are required for many
envisioned applications.
The presented scattering cancellation cloak was realized for the ﬁrst time for free-standing
three-dimensional objects in the visible domain. Beside the principle demonstration of a self-
assembled cloak the presented results are not achieved by top-down techniques so far. In
other words, the possibility to arrange resonant NPs into a desired geometry with unprece-
dented precision by self-assembly techniques enables the implementation of the scattering
cancellation cloak in the visible.
The next chapter includes a conclusion of the presented results of this thesis together with
a small outlook on possible future research directions of the ﬁeld of self-assembled MMs.

===== PAGE 102 =====
5 Conclusion 97
5 Conclusion
Die Hauptgebrechen meines Stils
sind eine unglückliche Neigung
zu allzu dichterischen Formen.
Alexander v. Humboldt
The ﬁeld of self-assembled bottom-up MMs has been quickly growing in the past several
years. The results presented in this thesis considerably contributed to various developments
in this ﬁeld, as will be outlined in the following.
At ﬁrst, a major contribution is on the theoretical side. The proposed concept of the
multipole analysis of meta-atoms, as outlined in Chap. 2, represents a powerful tool to
understand the optical response of self-assembled meta-atoms. Therewith, it is possible to
link resonances of the far-ﬁeld response to excited multipole moments of the meta-atom. In
additiontoaprovidedphysicalunderstandingfortheoriginofthemeta-atomresonances, this
enabled to tailor the optical response, as it has been demonstrated at the example of coupled
split-ring resonators in Sec. 2.3. Thus, the proposed multipole analysis is not restricted to
self-assembled meta-atoms but can be, in principle, applied for arbitrarily shaped meta-
atoms.
Beside these mentioned advantages of the multipole analysis, it serves as a ﬁrst step
to understand and describe the light propagation in amorphous MMs, as it was equally
developed in this thesis. The multipole analysis reveals under which circumstances the
scattering response of a meta-atom can be suﬃciently described by electric and magnetic
dipole moments. In such situation it is possible to treat the light propagation in the resulting
amorphous MM by eﬀective medium theories, as shown in Sec. 2.4. Based on the Clausius-
Mossotti relation eﬀective material parameters were assigned to the amorphous MM by
using the respective dipole moments of the meta-atoms. The accuracy of this formalism was
proven by comparing predictions of the light propagation based on such eﬀective medium
theories with rigorous full wave simulations of the amorphous MM. This has been done
while considering a well established meta-atom, i.e. the cut-plate pair. Maybe for the ﬁrst
time a formalism has been introduced to suﬃciently describe the light propagation through
amorphous MMs, which has been prior to the work of this thesis a very complex task. The
key advantage of this eﬀective medium theory is the reduction of the optical description
of amorphous MMs to the simulation of the scattering response of the single meta-atom.

===== PAGE 103 =====
5 Conclusion 98
This constitutes a major advantage since the complexity of the problem could be drastically
reduced. Apart from this, an important conclusion on the scattering response of the meta-
atoms was drawn. The response of the single meta-atom is required to be isotropic in order
to achieve a strong dispersion of the eﬀective material parameters of the resulting amorphous
MM.
Regarding all these previously given results the ﬁrst goal of the thesis, as set in Chap. 1,
has been reached. A theoretical description of amorphous MMs was introduced that allows
a feasible description of the optical response of these highly complex structures. This laid
the foundations for all the following results of this thesis.
The second goal of this thesis was on proposing concepts for experimental realizations of
self-assembled MMs. Although no experiments have been directly performed by the author
of this thesis, it was the intention to work together in close collaborations with various
experimentalists. The aim was to guide them theoretically and numerically and to provide
suggestions for feasible and relevant self-assembled MMs to be fabricated. Furthermore, the
numerical support considerably contributed to the understanding of experimental results by
providing insights that were inaccessible in an actual experimental situation.
In Chap. 3 planar self-assembled MMs, so-called meta-surfaces, are discussed in detail.
Strongly coupled arrays of metallic NPs were in the focus of interest. The advantage of
these MMs was the tunable distance between adjacent NP arrays in discrete steps of about
one nm. This has been achieved by a self-assembly technique based on electrostatic forces.
Symmetric as well as asymmetric resonances have been theoretically predicted and were
experimentally demonstrated in these MMs. The achieved physical understanding of these
resonances was exploited to develop an application for these planar self-assembled MMs.
This is documented in Sec. 3.3 where self-assembled tunable SERS substrates have been
theoretically investigated and were fabricated later on by a devoted self-assembly technique.
Chapter 4 presents an in-depth study of self-assembled three-dimensional MMs. In this
thesis the fabrication of bulk MMs with a remarkable extension along the propagation di-
rection of light was identiﬁed as one major advantage of self-assembly techniques. The ﬁrst
part of Chap. 4 focused on self-assembled meta-atoms with an isotropic magnetic dipole
response in the visible. Theoretical considerations predicted two possible meta-atom geome-
tries, a supramolecular cluster and a core-shell cluster. Both meta-atoms oﬀered the desired
isotropic magnetic dipole response that is required for many envisioned applications for the
ﬁeld of MMs. In addition, it has been demonstrated that the core-shell clusters yield such
a strong magnetic dipole response that it dominates the entire scattering response of the
meta-atom. Theoretical investigations of both proposed meta-atom geometries have been
experimentally realized by distinct self-assembly techniques later on.
The second part of Chap. 4 discusses a self-assembled cloaking device. The proposed
cloak is based on the concept of cancelling the scattering response of small objects. It

===== PAGE 104 =====
5 Conclusion 99
has been shown that the scattering of a silica sphere can be reduced up to an remarkable
extend of 75 % by covering the sphere with tiny silver NPs. Again the theoretical concept
was realized by self-assembly techniques and ﬁrst principle demonstrations yield25 % of
scattering reduction.
To sum up, in strong collaborations with chemists various bottom-up MMs have been
presented in Chap. 3 and 4. These MMs were self-assembled in order to achieve a desired
optical response, i.e. not only the self-assembly process was in the focus of interest but also
the optical properties of the fabricated MM. Based on an achieved theoretical understanding
of amorphous MMs, various novel applications have been experimentally realized in this
thesis, such as, self-assembled SERS substrates, a self-assembled MM with a strong response
to the magnetic ﬁeld and a self-assembled cloaking device. Therefore, the second goal of this
thesis has been equally met for a variety of distinct self-assembled MMs.
The next section discusses open questions on the ﬁeld of self-assembled MMs and, in
addition, further research directions and perspectives with respect to the results of this
thesis are given.
5.1 Open questions and perspectives
One open question is related to the description of light propagation in amorphous MMs.
In this thesis the description was successfully treated by the Clausius-Mossotti relation and
the respective dipole moments of the meta-atom. The important question is what are the
limitations of this formalism, i.e. at which ﬁlling fraction this description might break down
and what are the implications? This question is strongly linked to the interaction between
neighboring meta-atoms in the amorphous MM and to the existence of higher order multipole
moments that contribute to the scattering response of the meta-atoms. If the ﬁlling fraction
is too large the coupling of neighboring meta-atoms will cause a hybridization of the single
meta-atom resonances which cannot be described by the Clausius-Mossotti relation. Of
course it is also not possible to consider higher order multipole moments by the applied
eﬀective medium theory in this thesis. One possible way to solve these problems was already
touched in Sec. 2.5. There, it was stated that the T-Matrix formalism might be suitable to
describe the optical response of a cluster of arbitrarily arranged meta-atoms. Although the
spatial extension of the MM is required to be ﬁnite in this formalism, it might be a ﬁrst step
to understand the interaction of neighboring meta-atoms in amorphous MMs and to develop
a description beyond eﬀective medium theories.
A second open question is about the transition of the optical properties for diﬀerent
alignments of meta-atoms. So the question is which optical properties change and how they
do it if the alignment of meta-atoms is changed from amorphous to quasiperiodic or periodic.
First investigations of such eﬀects were already done based on alignments of polarizable

===== PAGE 105 =====
5 Conclusion 100
entities [207, 212, 222]. However, these investigations should be put further by considering
also higher order multipole moments of the meta-atom. The understanding of this point
would help a lot to improve self-assembled MMs further since, in principle, it might be
possible to control or even suppress unwanted eﬀects of the amorphus arrangement such as
the increased scattering losses.
The next open question is about the experimental realizations of self-assembled MMs.
Although a lot of functional devices have been demonstrated (also in this thesis) some
very important realizations still remain. One example is a MM with an isotropic negative
permeability and permittivity as it is required, e.g., for a perfect lens. In principle, such
a MM might be fabricated by self-assembly techniques, but up to date only self-assembled
bulk MMs with a dispersive eﬀective permeability are shown. However, it can be safely
anticipated that these ﬁrst demonstrations of a magnetic response can be improved further
in order to self-assemble a bulky MM with negative material parameters.
A relatively new, but already prominent and proﬁtable direction of research is related to
the interaction of meta-atoms with atomic systems, such as atoms or molecules. The atomic
systems have to be described by quantum physics. So the entire description of the coupled
system requires a solution of Maxwell’s equations for the meta-atom and the Schrödinger
equation for the atomic system. In this context the meta-atoms are commonly termed nano-
antennas [263] since they mediate far-ﬁeld and near-ﬁeld properties [332]. Several eﬀects
have been already intensively investigated, e.g., how the luminescence of molecules can be
controlled by nano-antennas [333–340].
Interestingly, the proposed concept of the multipole analysis can be also used to investi-
gate the interaction of nano-antennas with atomic systems. By slightly adopting the used
eigenfunctions of the multipole analysis, it is possible to extract multipole moments of the
near-ﬁeld. In other words it can be revealed which multipole moment has a huge impact
on the atomic system that is brought in close proximity to the nano-antenna [341]. These
considerations already yield some very interesting results. For example, it has been shown
that it is possible to excite dipole-forbidden transitions in atomic systems by applying a
suitable designed nano-antenna [342]. The ﬁeld of nano-antennas might be crucially eﬀected
by self-assembly techniques in order to fabricate structures with small feature sizes. Further-
more, the multipole analysis of meta-atoms remains a powerful tool to understand the optical
response of these nano-antennas and to describe their interaction with atomic systems.

===== PAGE 106 =====
Acknowledgements I
Acknowledgements
Now after ﬁnishing the thesis and by working on these lines I become aware that this work
would not have been possible without the amazing support of so many persons. These lines
are for all of you who helped me during my time as a PhD student.
First of all I want to thank Prof. Lederer for giving me the chance to write my thesis at
the Institute of Condensed Matter Theory and Solid State Optics at the Friedrich-Schiller
Universität Jena. I am very grateful that I could attend your outstanding lecture in The-
oretical Optics. For me it was the ﬁrst time that I have really understood the concepts of
modern optics.
Special thanks goes to Prof. Rockstuhl. I have started to work with you as a graduate
student and you accompanied me till this day. Thank you so much for all the things that
you have taught me during this long period, especially how to write perfect scientiﬁc articles,
how to present results, and how to optimize my time management. Furthermore, I want to
thank you for your amazing support and your unwavering conﬁdence in my skills.
Ialsogratefullyacknowledgethecarefulreadingandevaluationofthisthesisbyallreferees.
Special thanks goes to all members of the Photonics group. I always enjoyed the atmo-
sphere in our group and our profound discussions. I worked so closely together with some
members of the Photonics group that they even became friends. Therefore, it is hard for
me to express my gratitude in some sentences. First of all I wish to thank you all for the
great time. Especially, I would like to thank Dr. Christoph Menzel for introducing me to
the complex topic of eﬀective material parameters and for teaching me to have some tough
discussions. I am indebted to Dr. Stephan Fahr who taught me to produce nice ﬁgures.
Thank you also very much for the great time at the coﬀee breaks. Furthermore, I want to
thank Dr. Thomas Paul for introducing me on how to suﬃciently comment a MATLAB code
and how to take care of a haircut.
Furthermore, I would like to thank Erik Hebestreit for sharing the oﬃce with me for the
last year and for deriving the transformation rules between the symmetric and asymmetric
multipole coeﬃcients. Special thanks goes to Dr. Lutz Leine for taking care about the com-
putational infrastructure. Last but not least I want to thank our secretary Szilvia Mammel
for taking care of all administration issues.
This thesis would not have been possible without strong collaborations with many groups
from all over the world. Many merci goes to Dr. Toralf Scharf from the École Polytechnique

===== PAGE 107 =====
Acknowledgements II
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland. You are such an amazing and unorthodox
project coordinator and I really enjoyed all our meetings. Thank you also very much for the
great time in Neuchâtel; I will never forget it. Special thanks to Mr. Kim who has cleaned up
one of his desks and let me sit behind his wall of monitors at the EPFL. I would like to thank
Dr. José Dintinger for the experimental support and the great time in Switzerland. Many
thanks to Julie Lenoble Zwahlen from the EPFL for taking care of all the administrative
issues of the Nanogold project and for sharing her oﬃce with me.
From the University of Geneva I am indebted to Dr. Alastair Cunningham. Thank you so
much for the perfect collaboration, the experimental support and the resulting publications.
I really appreciated all our discussions and meetings. Special thanks goes to Prof. Bürgi from
the University of Geneva for the experimental support and the development of rewarding
ideas concerning self-assembly. I also want to thank Prof. Vassilis Yannopapas from the
University of Patras for the great project meeting near Athens and the perfect support with
the KKR method.
I gratefully acknowledge the collaboration with Reinhard Geiss and Florian Kretschmer
within the PhoNa project. Thank you so much for your power of endurance even at hard
times. I also want to thank Dr. Dana Cialla and Dr. Karina Weber from the Institute of
Photonic Technologies (IPHT) Jena for providing the SERS measurements and for fruitful
discussions. Furthermore, I like to thank Sebastian Scheeler and Dr. Claudia Pacholski from
the MPI Stuttgart. Thank you very much for the experimental support and the development
of new ideas on how to self-assemble meta-atoms. Last but not least I want to thank Martin
Thomas and Dr. Philipp Marquetand from the University of Vienna for our collaboration
about SERS enhancement mechanisms.
IalsowanttothankKarstenVerchforprovidingartisticviewsformanyofmypublications.
Now, at the end of the acknowledgments, comes the most important part, my family. I
want to thank all my family for the outstanding support during the last years. Especially my
parents supported me ﬁnancially during my study of physics. Furthermore, they watched
our children many times which helped a lot to write down this thesis. Thank you very much.
Special thanks goes to my sister Anna for the support as a baby sitter. I also want to thank
Gerlind Hauser for proof reading the introduction of the thesis.
Last but not least many thanks to my girlfriend Anna. It is hard to imagine what I would
do without you. Thank you very much for all the motivation, proof reading, the amusement,
and in particular for our awesome kids Clara, Martha and Paul.

===== PAGE 108 =====
Publications III
Publications
All publications in peer reviewed journals that are directly relevant for this thesis will appear
in bold letters in the following.
Contributed book chapters
1. C. Rockstuhl, C. Menzel, S. Mühlig, and F. Lederer,Theory of Optical Metamaterials
in Encyclopedia of Nanotechnologyby Bharat Bhushan (Springer, 2012, ISBN: 978-90-
481-9750-7).
2. S. Mühlig and C. Rockstuhl, Multipole analysis of self-assembled metamaterials in
Amorphous Nanophotonics by C. Rockstuhl and T. Scharf (Springer, 2013, ISBN:
978-3-642-32474-1).
Peer reviewed journals
1. S. Mühlig, C. Rockstuhl, J. Pniewski, C. R. Simovski, S. A. Tretyakov, and F. Lederer,
Three-dimensional metamaterial nanotips, Phys. Rev. B81, 075317 (2010).
2. A. Cunningham, S. Mühlig, C. Rockstuhl, and T. Bürgi,Coupling of plas-
mon resonances in tunable layered arrays of gold nanoparticles , J. Phys.
Chem. C 115, 8955–8960 (2011).
3. S. Mühlig, C. Rockstuhl, V. Yannopapas, T. Bürgi, N. Shalkevich, and
F. Lederer, Optical properties of a fabricated self-assembled bottom-up bulk
metamaterial, Opt. Express 19, 9607–9616 (2011).
4. M.-S. Kim, T. Scharf, S. Mühlig, C. Rockstuhl, and H. P. Herzig,Engineering photonic
nanojets, Opt. Express19, 10206–10220 (2011).
5. S. Mühlig, M. Farhat, C. Rockstuhl, and F. Lederer, Cloaking dielectric
spherical objects by a shell of metallic nanoparticles , Phys. Rev. B 84,
195116 (2011).

===== PAGE 109 =====
Publications IV
6. M.-S. Kim, T. Scharf, S. Mühlig, C. Rockstuhl, and H. P. Herzig,Gouy phase anomaly
in photonic nanojets, Appl. Phys. Lett.98, 191114 (2011).
7. C. Rockstuhl, C. Menzel, S. Mühlig, J. Peschtulat, C. Helgert, C. Etrich,
A. Chipouline, T. Pertsch, and F. Lederer,Scattering properties of meta-
atoms, Phys. Rev. B 83, 245119 (2011).
8. S. Mühlig, A. Cunningham, S. Scheler, C. Pacholski, T. Bürgi, C. Rock-
stuhl, and F. Lederer,Self-assembled plasmonic core-shell clusters with an
isotropic magnetic dipole response in the visible range , ACS Nano 5, 6586–
6592 (2011).
9. S. Mühlig, C. Menzel, C. Rockstuhl, and F. Lederer,Multipole analysis of
meta-atoms, Metamaterials 5, 64–73 (2011).
10. J. Dintinger, S. Mühlig, C. Rockstuhl, and T. Scharf,A bottom-up approach
to fabricate optical metamaterials by self-assembled metallic nanoparticles,
Opt. Mater. Express 2, 269–278 (2012).
11. M. Farhat, S. Mühlig, C. Rockstuhl, and F. Lederer, Scattering cancellation of the
magnetic dipole ﬁeld from macroscopic spheres, Opt. Express20, 13896–13906 (2012).
12. R. Filter, S. Mühlig, T. Eichelkraut, C. Rockstuhl, and F. Lederer,Controlling the
dynamics of quantum mechanical systems sustaining dipole-forbidden transitions via
optical nanoantennas, Phys. Rev. B86, 035404 (2012).
13. A. Cunningham, S. Mühlig
, C. Rockstuhl, and T. Bürgi, Exciting bright
and dark eigenmodes in strongly coupled asymmetric metallic nanoparticle
arrays, J. Phys. Chem. C 116, 17746–17752 (2012).
14. S. Mühlig
, A. Cunningham, J. Dintinger, T. Scharf, T. Bürgi, F. Lederer,
and C. Rockstuhl, Self-assembled plasmonic metamaterials , Nanophoton.
2, 211–240 (2013). [Review article]
15. S. Mühlig, A. Cunningham, J. Dintinger, M. Farhat, S. Bin Hasan, T.
Scharf, T. Bürgi, F. Lederer, and C. Rockstuhl, A self-assembled three-
dimensional cloak in the visible, Sci. Rep. 3, 02328 (2013).
Conference proceedings
1. J. Pniewski, S. Mühlig, C. Rockstuhl, and C. Simovski,Metamaterial nanotips with
multi-frequency local ﬁeld enhancement, Proc. SPIE7746, 774612 (2010).

===== PAGE 110 =====
Publications V
2. M.-S. Kim, T. Scharf, S. Mühlig, C. Rockstuhl, and H. P. Herzig,Photonic nanojet
engineering: focal point shaping with scattering phenomena of dielectric microspheres,
Proc. SPIE 7941 (2011).
3. M. Farhat, S. Mühlig, A. Cunningham, T. Bürgi, C. Rockstuhl, and F. Lederer,Cloak-
ing dielectric spheres by a shell of plasmonic nanoparticles, Proc. SPIE8423, 84231D
(2012).
4. M.-S. Kim, T. Scharf, H. P. Herzig, S. Mühlig, and C. Rockstuhl,Generation of highly
conﬁned optical bottle beams by exploiting the photonic nanojet eﬀect, Proc. SPIE,
8274, 82740U, (2012).
5. S. Mühlig, J. Dintinger, A. Cunningham, T. Scharf, T. Bürgi, C. Rockstuhl, and F.
Lederer, Bottom-up metamaterials with an isotropic magnetic response in the visible,
Proc SPIE8455, 84551G (2012).
Invited talks
1. Self-organized bottom-up metamaterials based on spatially arranged nanoparticles: Con-
cepts and realizations, T. Scharf, J.Dintinger, H.Selmane, G.Mehl, G.Ungar, X.Zeng,
C. Rockstuhl, S. Mühlig, T. Bürgi, A. Cunningham, L. di Sio, R. Caputo, V. Yannopa-
pas, W. Meier, T. Schuster,METAMATERIALS 2010, Karlsruhe, Germany.
2. Amorphous metamaterials, C. Rockstuhl, C.Menzel, S.Mühlig, C.Helgert, B.Walther,
A. Chipouline, C. Etrich, A. Cuningham, T. Bürgi, E.-B. Kley, T. Pertsch, F. Lederer,
EOS AM 2010, Paris, France.
3. Self-organized bottom-up metamaterial based on spatially arranged nanoparticles,
T. Scharf, J. Dintinger, H. Sellame, G. Mehl, G. Ungar, X. Zheng, C. Rockstuhl, S.
Mühlig, T. Kienzler, T. Bürgi, A. Cunningham,NOMA 2011, Cetaro, Italy.
4. Amorphous plasmonics and metamaterials, C. Rockstuhl, S. Mühlig, T. Kienzler and
F. Lederer,NOMA 2011, Cetaro, Italy.
5. Bottom-up metamaterials and plasmonic elements with metallic nanoparticles as build-
ing blocks, C. Rockstuhl
, S. Mühlig, A. Cunningham, T. Bürgi, J. Dintinger, and T.
Scharf, META 2012, Paris, France.
6. Bottom-up metamaterials and plasmonic elements with metallic nanoparticles as ba-
sic building blocks, C. Rockstuhl
, S. Mühlig, R. Filter, A. Cunningham, T. Bürgi, J.
Dintinger, and T. Scharf,PECS-X 2012, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA.

===== PAGE 111 =====
Publications VI
7. Multipole analysis of meta-atoms, F. Lederer, C. Menzel, C. Rockstuhl, and S. Mühlig,
Frontiers in Optics 2012, Rochester, New York, USA.
8. Liquid crystal plasmonic metamaterials, T. Scharf, J. Dintinger, B.-J. Tang, G. H.
Mehl, X. Zeng, G. Ungar, S. Mühlig, T. Kienzler, and C. Rockstuhl,SPIE Photonics
West 2012, San Francisco, USA.
9. A self assembled cloak, C. Rockstuhl, S. Mühlig, M. Farhat, F. Lederer, A. Cunning-
ham, T. Bürgi, J. Dintinger, and T. Scharf,Nanometa 2013, Bad Seefeld, Austria.
10. Controlling the dynamics of quantum mechanical process using meta-atoms,
C. Rockstuhl, R. Filter, S. Mühlig, T. Eichelkraut, S. Fischer, J. C. Goldschmidt, and
F. Lederer,PIERS 2013, Taipai, Taiwan.
11. A cloak from self-assembled metallic nanoparticles, C. Rockstuhl, S.Mühlig, M.Farhat,
S. Bin Hasan, A. Cunningham, T. Bürgi, J, Dintinger, T. Scharf, and F. Lederer,
META 2013, Dubai, Arab Emirates.
12. Towards homogeneous magnetic metamaterials - a comprehensive multipole analysis,
C. Menzel, E. Hebestreit, S. Mühlig, S. Burger, C. Rockstuhl, F. Lederer, and T.
Pertsch,META 2013, Dubai, Arab Emirates.
Conference contributions
1. Localizing light using metamaterial nanotips, C. Rockstuhl, S. Mühlig, C. R. Simovski,
S. A. Tretyakov, and F. Lederer,CLEO Europe 2010, Munich, Germany.
2. Three-dimensional metamaterial nanotips, S. Mühlig, C. Rockstuhl, J. Pniewski, C.
Simovski, and F. Lederer,OSA META 2010, Tuscon, USA.
3. Amorphous bulk metamaterials, C. Rockstuhl, C. Menzel, S. Mühlig, C. Helgert, B.
Walther, A. Chipouline, C. Etrich, E.-B. Kley, T. Pertsch, and F. Lederer,META-
MATERIALS 2010, Karlsruhe, Germany.
4. Eﬀective properties of self-assembled bottum-up metamaterials, S. Mühlig, A. Cunning-
ham, C. Rockstuhl, T. Bürgi, and F. Lederer,PECS 2010, Granada, Spain.
5. Amplitude and phase ﬁelds of photonic nanojets, M.-S. Kim, T. Scharf, H. P. Herzig,
S. Mühlig, and C. Rockstuhl,EOS AM 2010, Paris, France.
6. Optical properties of bottom-up metamaterials, T. Kienzler, S.Mühlig, A.Cunningham,
C. Rockstuhl, T. Bürgi, and F. Lederer,TaCoNa 2010, Bad Honnef, Germany.

===== PAGE 112 =====
Publications VII
7. Multifrequency local ﬁeld enhancement by a metamaterial nanopyramid, C. Simovski,
J. Pniewski, S. Mühlig and C. Rockstuhl,Days on Diﬀraction 2010, St. Petersburg,
Russia.
8. Absorption enhancement in thin-ﬁlm solar cells by nanophotonic structures, S. Fahr,
T. Paul, S. Mühlig, C. Rockstuhl, and F. Lederer,PhoNa International Workshop
2010, Jena, Germany.
9. Chirality as a bulk property retrieved from the dispersion relation, C. Menzel, C. Rock-
stuhl, S. Mühlig, T. Paul, and F. Lederer,PhoNa International Workshop 2010,
Jena, Germany.
10. Anomalous diﬀraction and refraction in negative-index metamaterials, T. Paul, C.
Menzel, S. Fahr, S. Mühlig, C. Rockstuhl, and F. Lederer,PhoNa International
Workshop 2010, Jena, Germany.
11. Photonic nanojet engineering: Focal point shaping with scattering phenomena of dielec-
tric microspheres, M.-S. Kim
, T. Scharf, S. Mühlig, C. Rockstuhl, and H. P. Herzig,
SPIE Photonics West 2011, San Francisco, USA.
12. Cloaking dielectric spheres by a shell of metallic nanoparticles, M. Farhat, S. Mühlig,
C. Rockstuhl, and F. Lederer,NOMA 2011, Cetaro, Italy.
13. Observation of axial phase evolution of highly conﬁned light ﬁelds, M.-S. Kim, T.Scharf,
S. Mühlig, C. Rockstuhl, and H. P. Herzig.Frontiers in Optics 2011, San Jose,
California.
14. Cloaking dielectric spheres by a shell of metallic nanoparticles, M. Farhat, S. Mühlig,
C. Rockstuhl, and F. Lederer,Metamaterials 2011, Barcelona, Spain.
15. Assigning eﬀective parameters to amorphous metamaterials, S. Mühlig, C. Menzel,
T. Paul
, C. Rockstuhl, and F. Lederer,Metamaterials 2011, Barcelona, Spain.
16. On the isotropic magnetic response of fabricated core-shell clusters and its ability to
cloak, S. Mühlig
, A. Cunningham, M. Farhat, C. Rockstuhl, T. Bürgi, and F. Lederer,
CLEO/QELS 2011, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
17. Generation of highly conﬁned optical bottle beams by photonic nanojet eﬀect, M.-S. Kim,
T. Scharf, S. Mühlig, C. Rockstuhl, and H. P. Herzig,SPIE Photonics West 2012,
San Francisco, USA.
18. Bottom-up fabrication and optical properties of metallic nanoparticle assemblies,
A. Cunningham, S. Mühlig, C. Rockstuhl, and T. Bürgi,International Conference
on Metamaterials 2012, Jena, Germany.

===== PAGE 113 =====
Publications VIII
19. Bottom-up metamaterials with an isotropic magnetic response, S. Mühlig, A. Cunning-
ham, J. Dintinger, T. Scharf, T. Bürgi, C. Rockstuhl, and F. Lederer,International
Conference on Metamaterials 2012, Jena, Germany.
20. Coupling eﬀects in tuneable layers of metal nanoparticles, S. Mühlig, A. Cunningham,
D. Cialla, K. Weber, T. Bürgi, C. Rockstuhl, and F. Lederer,Metamaterials 2012,
St. Petersburg, Russia.
21. Controlling the dynamics of quantum mechanical systems using meta-atoms,
C. Rockstuhl, R. Filter, T. Eichelkraut, S. Mühlig, S. Fischer, J. C. Goldschmidt, and
F. Lederer,Metamaterials 2012, St. Petersburg, Russia.
22. Bottom-up metamaterials with an isotropic magnetic response in the visible, S. Mühlig,
J. Dintinger, A. Cunningham, T. Scharf, T. Bürgi, C. Rockstuhl, and F. Lederer,SPIE
Optics Photonics 2012, San Diego, USA.
23. Plasmonic nanoparticles for a bottom-up approach to fabricate optical metamaterials,
J. Dintinger, S. Mühlig, C. Rockstuhl, and T. Scharf,EMRS Fall Meeting 2012,
Strassbourg, France.
24. Strong coupling eﬀects in fabricated tunable layers of metal nanoparticles, S. Mühlig, C.
Rockstuhl, F. Lederer, A. Cunningham, T. Bürgi, D. Cialla and K. Weber,CIMTEC
2012, Montecatini Terme, Italy.
25. Cloaking dielectric spheres by a shell of plasmonic nanoparticles, M. Farhat, S. Mühlig,
C. Rockstuhl, F. Lederer, A. Cunningham, and T. Bürgi,SPIE Photonics Europe
2012, Brussels, Belgium.
26. A ﬁrst-principles study of surface enhanced Raman spectra of molecules adsorbed to
plasmonic nanocomposites, M. Thomas, S. Mühlig, E. Hebestreit, T. Deckert-Gaudig,
V. Deckert, P. Marquetand, and C. Rockstuhl, META 2013, Dubai, Arab Emirates.
27. Tunable magnetic dipole response of core-shell clusters, M. Fruhnert, S. Mühlig, C.
Rockstuhl, and F. Lederer,Metamaterials 2013, Bordeaux, France.

===== PAGE 114 =====
Short Curriculum Vitae IX
Short Curriculum Vitae
Personal data
Name Stefan Mühlig
Date of birth 09/06/1984
Place of birth Jena, Germany
Academic career
11/2009–03/2012 Scientiﬁc employee at Institute of Condensed Matter Theory
and Solid State Optics (IFTO), at the Friedrich-Schiller
Universität (FSU) Jena, Germany.
03/2012–06/2012 Scientiﬁc employee at Optics and Photonics Technology Laboratory,
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Neuchâtel,
Switzerland.
07/2012–current Scientiﬁc employee at IFTO, FSU Jena, Germany.
09/2013 Submittance of PhD thesis entitled “Towards Self-Assembled
Metamaterials”.
Teaching activity
Winter term 2011/12 Classical electrodynamics, seminar (2 SWS).
Winter term 2012/13 Classical electrodynamics, seminar (2 SWS).
Education
09/1997–06/2003 Carl–Zeiss–Spezialschule Jena; Degree: Abitur.
09/2003–06/2004 Alternative national service.
10/2004–09/2006 Study of Physics at Technische Universität Dresden, Germany.
10/2006–09/2009 Study of Physics at FSU Jena, Germany.
09/2009 Diploma degree in physics from the FSU Jena, Germany.

===== PAGE 115 =====
Ehrenwörtliche Erklärung X
Ehrenwörtliche Erklärung
Hiermit erkläre ich ehrenwörtlich, dass ich die vorliegende Arbeit selbstständig, ohne un-
zulässige Hilfe Dritter und ohne Benutzung anderer als der angegebenen Hilfsmittel und
Literatur angefertigt habe. Die aus anderen Quellen direkt oder indirekt übernommenen
Daten und Konzepte sind unter Angabe der Quelle gekennzeichnet.
Bei der Auswahl und Auswertung folgenden Materials haben mir die nachstehend aufge-
führten Personen in der jeweils beschriebenen Weise unentgeltlich geholfen
1. Die gezeigten Ergebnisse der Abbildung 2.4 und 2.5 wurden von Dr. Christoph Menzel
(IFTO, FSU Jena) simuliert.
2. Die Transmissionsspektren in Abbildung 2.7 wurden von Dr. Christoph Etrich (IFTO,
FSU Jena) simuliert. Die Auswertung in Abbildung 2.8 wurde von Prof. Rockstuhl
(IFTO, FSU Jena) vorgenommen.
3. Die SEM Aufnahmen der Abbildungen 3.2 (A), 3.3 (A), 3.6 (A), 3.7 (A), 3.14 (B) und
4.10 (B) wurden von Dr. Alastair Cunningham (University of Geneva) angefertigt.
4. Die gezeigten Messergebnisse in den Abbildungen 3.2 (B), 3.4, 3.5 (A), 3.7 (B), 3.8
(A), 3.9 und 4.10 (D) wurden von Dr. Alastair Cunningham (University of Geneva)
gemessen.
5. Die SERS Spektren der Abbildungen 3.14 (A) und (C) wurden von Dr. Dana Cialla
und Dr. Karina Weber (IPHT Jena) aufgenommen und ausgewertet.
6. Die experimentellen Ergebnisse der Abbildung 4.5 wurden von Dr. José Dintinger und
Dr. Toralf Scharf (EPFL Neuchâtel) erzeugt.
7. Die experimentellen Ergebnisse der Abbildungen 4.10 (A) und (C) wurden durch Se-
bastian Scheeler und Dr. Claudia Pacholski (MPI Stuttgart) erzeugt.
8. DieexperimentellenErgebnissderAbbildung4.15(A)wurdendurchDr.JoséDintinger
(EPFL Neuchâtel) und Dr. Alastair Cunningham (University of Geneva) erzeugt.
9. Carsten Verch hat die Abbildung 4.11 basierend auf einer Prinzipskizze von mir ge-
zeichnet.

===== PAGE 116 =====
Ehrenwörtliche Erklärung XI
Weitere Personen waren an der inhaltlich-materiellen Erstellung der vorliegenden Arbeit
nicht beteiligt. Insbesondere habe ich hierfür nicht die entgeltliche Hilfe von Vermittlungs-
bzw. Beratungsdiensten (Promotionsberater oder andere Personen) in Anspruch genommen.
Niemand hat von mir unmittelbar oder mittelbar geldwerte Leistungen für Arbeiten erhal-
ten, die im Zusammenhang mit dem Inhalt der vorgelegten Dissertation stehen.
Die Arbeit wurde bisher weder im In- noch im Ausland in gleicher oder ähnlicher Form einer
anderen Prüfungsbehörde vorgelegt.
Die geltende Promotionsordnung der Physikalisch-Astronomischen Fakultät ist mir bekannt.
Ich versichere ehrenwörtlich, dass ich nach bestem Wissen die reine Wahrheit gesagt und
nichts verschwiegen habe.
Jena, 16. September 2013 Unterschrift

===== PAGE 117 =====
Zusammenf assung XII
Zusammenfassung
Die vorliegende Arbeit befasst sich mit der theoretischen Beschreibung und der möglichen
experimentellen Umsetzung von selbstorganisierten Metamaterialien, die ein sich schnell ent-
wickelndes und sehr erfolgreiches Feld der Optik darstellen. Entscheidende Beiträge zur
Weiterentwicklung dieses wissenschaftlichen Feldes wurden im Rahmen dieser Arbeit doku-
mentiert und sollen im Folgenden kurz zusammengefasst werden.
Der erste wesentliche Beitrag beschäftigt sich mit der theoretischen Beschreibung von
selbstorganisierten Metamaterialien. Dazu wurde in Kap. 2 das Konzept der Multipolana-
lyse von Meta-Atomen eingeführt. Dieses Konzept ermöglicht ein tiefes physikalisches Ver-
ständnis der optischen Antwort eines einzelnen Meta-Atoms. Im Speziellen ist es möglich,
auftretende Resonanzen im Fernfeld mit angeregten Multipolmomenten des Meta-Atoms in
Verbindung zu bringen. Dies ermöglicht Rückschlüsse auf den Ursprung der angeregten
Resonanzen. Weiterhin wurde am Beispiel von gekoppelten Split-Ring-Resonatoren gezeigt,
dass durch die Multipolanalyse maßgeschneiderte Resonanzen im Meta-Atom eingestellt wer-
den können. Ein weiterer Vorteil besteht darin, dass das Konzept der Multipolanalyse auf
beliebige Geometrien angewendet werden kann und daher nicht auf selbstorganisierte Meta-
Atome beschränkt ist.
Abgesehen von den eben diskutierten Vorteilen der Multipolanalyse bildet dieses Konzept
einen wichtigen Grundstein zur Beschreibung der Ausbreitung von Licht in amorphen Meta-
materialien, wie sie in dieser Arbeit entwickelt wurde. Mit Hilfe der Multipolanalyse kann
entschieden werden, ob die Streuantwort eines Meta-Atoms rein durch elektrische und mag-
netische Dipolmomente beschrieben werden kann. Ist dies der Fall, dann ist es möglich, die
Ausbreitung von Licht im resultierenden Metamaterial mit Hilfe von eﬀektiven Medium-
Theorien zu beschreiben, wie es in der vorliegenden Arbeit in Kap. 2 gezeigt ist. Die
Clausius-Mossotti Relation ermöglicht es, den amorphen Metamaterialien eﬀektive Mate-
rialparameter zuzuweisen. Dazu werden die entsprechenden Dipolmomente der Meta-Atome
benötigt. Die Exaktheit einer solchen Methode wurde wie folgt überprüft. Die Vorhersagen
des eﬀektiven Medium Modells wurden mit rigorosen Simulationen eines amorphen Meta-
materials (bestehend aus sogenannten Cut-Plate Paaren) verglichen und ergaben qualitativ
und quantitativ gleiche Ergebnisse. Damit wurde im Rahmen dieser Arbeit ein Formalismus
entwickelt, der eine hinreichend genaue optische Beschreibung von amorphen Metamateri-
alien ermöglicht. Diese Beschreibung konnte vor den Ergebnissen dieser Arbeit nur durch

===== PAGE 118 =====
Zusammenf assung XIII
aufwendige Rechnungen erfolgen. Dies ist nun nicht mehr nötig, da die Verwendung von
eﬀektiven Medium-Theorien es erlaubt, die Lichtausbreitung in amorphen Metamaterialien
unter Betrachtung der angeregten Dipolmomente der einzelnen Meta-Atome zu beschreiben.
Diese Vereinfachung stellt zugleich den wesentlichen Vorteil der hier vorgestellten Methode
dar.
Weiterhin konnte im Rahmen der Betrachtungen in Kap. 2 die folgende wichtige Eigen-
schaft für Meta-Atome abgeleitet werden. Um einen möglichst großen Einﬂuss der Resonan-
zen der Meta-Atome auf die Dispersion der eﬀektiven Materialparameter des resultierenden
Metamaterials zu erzielen, ist es entscheidend, dass die Meta-Atome eine isotrope optische
Antwort aufweisen.
Unter Betrachtung aller eben diskutierten Ergebnisse lässt sich festhalten, dass die vor-
liegende Arbeit wesentlich dazu beigetragen hat, eine kohärente optische Beschreibung von
selbstorganisierten, amorphen Metamaterialien zu entwickeln und zu etablieren. Dies bildet
die Grundlage für alle folgenden Ergebnisse.
Der zweite wesentliche Beitrag der vorliegenden Arbeit besteht in der experimentelle Um-
setzung von selbstorganisierten Metamaterialien. Obgleich keinerlei Experimente vom Autor
der Arbeit direkt durchgeführt wurden, war es eine entscheidende Intention dieser Arbeit, in
enger Zusammenarbeit mit Experimentatoren funktionsfähige Metamaterialien durch Selbst-
organisation zu entwickeln und herzustellen. Im Speziellen ist dazu ein grundsolides the-
oretisches Verständnis von amorphen Metamaterialien nötig, wie es in Kap. 2 dieser Arbeit
dokumentiert ist. Auf dieser Basis konnten in Zusammenhang mit numerischen Simulationen
Vorschläge für mögliche Meta-Atom Geometrien entwickelt werden, die im Anschluss durch
ausgewählte Selbstorganisationsprozesse hergestellt werden konnten. Weiterhin erlaubten
die numerischen Simulationen ein tieferes Verständnis der experimentellen Ergebnisse, da
insbesondere Größen berechnet werden konnten, auf die man im Experiment keinen direkten
Zugriﬀ hatte.
Kapitel 3 der vorliegenden Arbeit beschäftigt sich mit planaren selbstorganisierten Meta-
materialien, sogenannten Meta-Oberﬂächen. Im Speziellen wurden stark gekoppelte Lagen
bestehend aus metallischen Nanopartikeln untersucht. Der Abstand dieser Lagen konnte
in einem Selbstorganisationsprozess in diskreten Schritten von einem Nanometer eingestellt
werden. Dies ermöglichte die Untersuchung von stark gekoppelten Nanopartikeln. Sym-
metrische und asymmetrische Resonanzen konnten in diesen Systemen nachgewiesen werden.
Basierend auf einem tiefen physikalischen Verständnis dieser speziellen planaren Metamate-
rialien wurde eine Anwendung entwickelt. Substrate für oberﬂächenverstärkte Raman Spek-
troskopie, die sich in ihrer Resonanzwellenlänge durchstimmen lassen, wurden numerisch
untersucht und im Anschluss durch einen speziellen Selbstorganisationsprozess hergestellt.
Kapitel. 4 beinhaltet eine Untersuchung dreidimensionaler selbstorganisierter Metamateri-
alien. Die Möglichkeit Volumenstrukturen herzustellen, die eine entscheidende Ausdehnung

===== PAGE 119 =====
Zusammenf assung XIV
entlang der Propagationsrichtung des Lichtes aufweisen, stellt einen wesentlichen Vorteil
von Selbstorganisationsprozessen dar. Der erste Teil von Kap. 4 diskutiert dreidimensionale
Meta-Atome, die eine isotrope magnetische Dipolresonanz im sichtbaren Spektralbereich
aufweisen. DurchtheoretischeBetrachtungenkonntenzweimöglicheMeta-AtomGeometrien
identiﬁziert werden, ein sogenanntes Supramolekulares Cluster und ein Core-Shell Cluster.
Für beide Geometrien wurde das magnetische Dipolmoment durch numerische Rechnungen
nachgewiesen, das eine entscheidende Voraussetzung für viele vorgeschlagene Anwendungen
von Metamaterialien darstellt. Weiterhin konnte gezeigt werden, dass für Core-Shell Cluster
das magnetische Dipolmoment stark genug ausgeprägt ist, um die Streuantwort des Meta-
Atoms zu dominieren. Beide vorgeschlagenen Meta-Atom Geometrien wurden im Anschluss
durch verschiedene Selbstorganisationsprozesse hergestellt.
Der zweite Teil von Kap. 4 beschäftigt sich mit der Herstellung einer optischen Tarnkappe
durchSelbstorganisationsprozesse. DasimRahmendieserArbeitvorgestellteKonzeptbasiert
auf der Unterdrückung der Streuantwort von optisch kleinen Objekten. Es wurde gezeigt,
dass die Streuantwort einer dielektrischen Kugel um bis zu75% reduziert werden kann, wenn
man sie mit kleinen Silber-Nanopartikeln umschließt. Das theoretische Konzept wurde aber-
mals durch Selbstorganisationsprozesse realisiert. Eine erste Demonstration des Konzeptes
ermöglichte eine experimentelle Reduktion der Streuantwort von25 %.
Zusammenfassend bleibt festzuhalten, dass in enger Zusammenarbeit mit experimentellen
PartnerneinegroßeVielfaltvonselbstorganisiertenMetamaterialenimRahmendieserArbeit
entwickelt und hergestellt wurden. Entscheidend dabei war der Fokus auf die resultierende
optische Antwort der Metamaterialien und nicht auf den zugrunde liegenden Selbstorganisa-
tionsprozess. Basierend auf dem entwickelten theoretischen Verständnis für amorphe Meta-
materialien wurden verschiedenartige Anwendungen von Metamaterialien im Rahmen dieser
Arbeit umgesetzt, wie z. B. selbstorganisierte Substrate für oberﬂächenverstärkte Raman
Spektroskopie, selbstorganisierte Metamaterialien mit einer starken magnetischen Dipolre-
sonanz und eine selbstorganisierte optische Tarnkappe. Damit trägt die vorliegende Arbeit
wesentlich zur Weiterentwicklung und experimentellen Umsetzung von selbstorganisierten
Metamaterialien bei.

===== PAGE 120 =====
Bibliography XV
Bibliography
[1] R. F. Service,How far can we push chemical self-assembly?, Science309, 95 (2005).
[2] G. M. Whitesides, J. P. Mathias, and C. T. Seto, Molecular self-assembly and
nanochemistry: A chemical strategy for the synthesis of nanostructures, Science254,
1312–1319 (1991).
[3] G. M. Whitesides and B. Grzybowski,Self-assembly at all scales, Science295, 2418–
2421 (2002).
[4] K. J. M. Bishop, C. E. Wilmer, S. Soh, and B. A. Grzybowski,Nanoscale forces and
their uses in self-assembly, Small5, 1600–1630 (2009).
[5] C. L. Choi and A. P. Alivisatos,From artiﬁcial atoms to nanocrytstal molecules: Prepa-
ration and properties of more complex nanostructures, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem.61,
369–389 (2010).
[6] J. M. Romo-Herrera, R. A. Alvarez-Puebla, and L. M. Liz-Marzán,Controlled assembly
of plasmonic colloidal nanoparticle clusters, Nanoscale3, 1304–1315 (2011).
[7] A. Guerrero-Martínez, J. L. Alonso-Gómez, B. Auguié, M. M. Cid, and L. M. Liz-
Marzán, From individual to collective chirality in metal nanoparticles, Nano Today6,
381–400 (2011).
[8] C. Rockstuhl and T. Scharf,Amorphous nanophotonics (Berlin, Springer, 2013), 1st
ed.
[9] S. Mühlig, A. Cunningham, J. Dintinger, T. Scharf, T. Bürgi, F. Lederer, and C. Rock-
stuhl, Self-assembled plasmonic metamaterials, Nanophoton.2, 211–240 (2013).
[10] V. M. Shalaev,Optical negative-index metamaterials, Nature Photon.1, 41–48 (2007).
[11] C. M. Soukoulis and M. Wegener, Past achievements and future challenges in the
development of three-dimensional photonic metamaterials, Nature Photon.5, 523–530
(2011).
[12] J. B. Pendry, D. Schurig, and D. R. Smith,Controlling electromagnetic ﬁelds, Science
312, 1780–1782 (2006).

