2 Theoretical background
29
Fig. 2.4 (B). However, due to conductive coupling an additional current is excited in the
SRR base (shown by the black dashed arrow in the SRR base). The base current causes a
resonant electric dipole moment pz at the magnetic dipole resonance. For a regular lattice
of SRR for the investigated illumination in Fig. 2.4 this dipole moment cannot be observed
since it radiates neither in forward nor in backward direction. However, the pz moment has
dramatic impact if the SRRs are rotated to each other in a lattice or if they are amorphously
arranged [126]. The additional multipole moment pz causes more complicated constitutive
relations, as will be discussed in Sec. 2.4. Furthermore, the pz moment had a great historical
inﬂuence to indirectly probe the magnetic resonance of SRRs under normal incidence (along
the y-direction) [183–186]. Under normal incidence the pz dipole moment can be excited that
causes a magnetic dipole moment my [151, 187]. In this situation the my dipole moment
cannot be probed in a regular lattice of SRRs. However, it has crucial impact on the coupling
of neighboring SRR in the lattice [187, 188].
The second resonance of the SRR of Fig. 2.4 (B) at 1200 nm oﬀers a resonant electric
dipole moment px. There, the currents in both SRR arms are oscillating in phase. There-
fore, no additional current is excited in the SRR base and the pz dipole moment is small
at these wavelengths. The third order resonance at 900 nm has contributions of several
multipole moments. Especially, an electric quadrupole moment is observed that hampers
the description by simple eﬀective material parameters at these wavelengths.
The multipole analysis can be used now to suggest novel designs for meta-atoms where
the unwanted electric dipole contribution pz at the magnetic dipole resonance is suppressed.
Consider another SRR that has its base on the opposite site of the arms. This SRR should
obtain the same electric multipole moment pz but π out of phase compared to the SRR of
Fig. 2.4 (B). The combination of two SRRs with opposite base position should, therefore,
totally suppress the contribution of the electric dipole moment pz [189, 190]. This can be
clearly seen by the two possible SRR orientations that fulﬁll this requirement as shown in
Fig. 2.5. In both cases the electric dipole moment pz could be totally suppressed at the
ﬁrst order magnetic dipole resonance [180]. Furthermore, as expected, one observes a slight
shift of all resonance positions due to the coupling of both SRRs and a more complicated
multipole contribution at the second and third order resonance.
To sum up, in this section the multipole analysis of meta-atoms has been introduced. If the
scattered ﬁeld of an arbitrarily shaped meta-atom is known, this ﬁeld can be decomposed into
its Cartesian multipole moments. This is done by applying the VSHs from Mie theory and
by using transformation rules between spherical and Cartesian multipole moments. Several
examples of single meta-atoms have been discussed and the enormous advantage of the
introduced formalism was outlined. At every frequency all contributing multipole moments
can be identiﬁed. That allows an easy understanding of the complex response of meta-atoms
by a few physical quantities, i.e. by the multipole moments. Furthermore, the knowledge of
