2 Theoretical background
26
section. At a particular wavelength the precise contribution of each multipole moment to
the scattered ﬁeld can be extracted. Of course, the observed features in Fig. 2.3 (A) are
the resonances of the Mie coeﬃcients (cf. Eq. 2.21). Therefore, they are commonly termed
Mie resonances of high permittivity spheres. In a lowest order approximation the magnetic
dipole resonance (at 1500 nm) appears if the wavelength inside the sphere is identical to its
diameter [156]. So the resonance position can be tuned by the permittivity and the radius of
the sphere. Currently, these magnetic dipole resonances of high index spheres are attracting
a lot of interest to build up all-dielectric MMs that sustain artiﬁcial magnetism [154–171].
The second example in Fig. 2.3 (B) presents a single gold sphere (40 nm radius) embedded
in glass. These plasmonic spheres of sub-wavelength dimension are commonly used building
blocks of self-assembled meta-atoms. As can be seen in Fig. 2.3 (B) they possess resonance
features in the visible that can be fully described by an electric dipole resonance over the
entire spectra. This resonance is linked to a resonance of the Mie coeﬃcient a1, as introduced
in Sec. 2.2. In the electrostatic approximation the size parameter x and the refractive index
contrast η can be assumed as x ≪1, |η|x ≪1. In this regime the Mie coeﬃcient a1 of
Eq. 2.21 is much larger than all remaining ones and it can be approximated as [54]
a1 = −2ix3
3
η2 −1
η2 + 2 .
(2.34)
Inserting this result into the cross sections (cf. Eq. 2.24) yields
Csca = 8
3πk4a6

εsph −ε
εsph + 2ε

2
,
Cabs = 4πka3ℑ
 εsph −ε
εsph + 2ε

.
(2.35)
The following remarks are in order. First, the absorption cross section scales with the volume
of the sphere (a3) whereas the scattering cross section scales with the volume squared (a6).
Therefore, as long as the spheres are not too small, scattering dominates over absorption.
Second, both cross sections exhibit a term in the dominator that is resonant if εsph + 2ε =
0.
This resonance condition can be fulﬁlled for real valued permittivities of the sphere
and the surrounding with opposite signs. For complex permittivities of the sphere or the
surroundings the resonance condition cannot be met perfectly. That causes a ﬁnite full width
half maximum (FWHM) of the cross sections that is connected to the imaginary part of the
permittivity. For a gold sphere in vacuum the resonance wavelength is around 500 nm and
it can shifted to longer wavelengths by changing the dielectric environment. In Fig. 2.3 (B)
the resonance wavelength is 590 nm for a gold sphere in glass. The observed resonance is
the LSPR as introduced in Chap. 1. The free electrons of the gold sphere are driven into
resonance by the incident ﬁeld [172]. The important conclusion of Fig. 2.3 (B) is that the
electric dipole moment is fully suﬃcient to describe the scattering of a small metal sphere
in the visible domain.
