2 Theoretical background
21
in numerical simulations at n = N depending on the size parameter x (cf. Eq. 2.22) of the
sphere. For a sphere the following truncation is usually considered to be valid [54]
N = x + 4x1/3 + 2 .
(2.25)
Furthermore, also the internal ﬁeld of the sphere can be expanded into the VSHs analogous to
Eq. 2.18 [148, 149]. The unknown coeﬃcients of this expansion can be related by two further
Mie coeﬃcients to the expansion coeﬃcients of the incident ﬁeld. Anyhow, as discussed in the
previous section, the internal ﬁeld carries no further information and it is of minor interest
for the ﬁeld of MMs. Therefore, it is not explicitly discussed here.
The scattering of a single sphere appears to be a very special case. However, in the next
section it is shown, that on the base of the single sphere results the scattering problem of
a huge class of MMs can be accessed. Moreover, a formalism is developed that allows to
describe complex MMs by a few physical quantities that are beneﬁcial to understand the
fundamental excitations in these MMs.
2.3 Multipole analysis of meta-atoms
In this section a formalism is introduced that allows the reliable description of the elec-
tromagnetic scattering by an arbitrarily shaped scatterer, or meta-atom, on the base of a
few dominating multipole moments. This allows for a deep physical insight into the excited
resonances of the meta-atom, as shown later. Thus, the meta-atom can be designed for a
desired response. Furthermore, it serves as a ﬁrst step for a treatment of amorphous MMs by
eﬀective medium theories. After the analytical description of the formalism a few examples
of meta-atoms are discussed and the advantage of the formalism is outlined.
2.3.1 Formal introduction
The formalism is based on the previously described scattering by a single sphere.
The
expansion of the electrodynamic ﬁelds into the VSHs N, M of Eq. 2.18 is, except some
prefactors, identical to a multipole expansion in spherical coordinates [151]. The scattering
coeﬃcients serve as the multipole moments. Please note, in this section a slightly diﬀerent
formulation of the ﬁeld expansion is used when compared to the historically established
one from Bohren and Huﬀman [54] of the last section. The only purpose is to derive more
symmetrical transformation rules when the Cartesian multipole moments are expressed in
terms of the spherical multipole moments, as will be shown later. The scattered electric ﬁeld
