2 Theoretical background
33
on k. Since a huge number of self-assembled MMs result in amorphous structures, this amor-
phous arrangement constitutes enormous advantage concerning spatial dispersion. Spatial
dispersion due to periodically arranged meta-atoms is not observed for self-assembled MMs.
The second mechanism yielding spatial dispersion is related to higher order multipole
moments of the single meta-atom. It has been shown in literature that higher order spatial
derivatives of the electric ﬁeld can be linked to spatial dispersion. While ﬁrst order spatial
derivatives can be transformed into a magneto-electric coupling κ(ω), this is not possible
for second order spatial derivatives of the electric ﬁeld [178, 198–200].
It is beyond the
scope of this thesis to prove this statement, but we want to discuss the consequences by
some illustrative considerations. If the electric interaction energy Wel between an external
electric ﬁeld and a given charge density is expanded into a Taylor series, the following result
is obtained (ignoring electric monopole moments) [52]
Wel(ω) = −p(ω)E(r, ω) −1
6
X
i,j
Qij(ω)∂Ej(r, ω)
∂xi
+ · · · .
(2.37)
The dipole moment interacts with the electric ﬁeld and the electric quadrupole moment with
the ﬁrst derivative of the electric ﬁeld. The same is obtained if the multipole expansion of
the external charge density ρext is performed as it appears in Maxwell’s equations [200–202].
There, the quadrupole moment enters the equation with the ﬁrst derivative of the electric
ﬁeld. The remaining question is about the excitation of the quadrupole moment in the meta-
atom. If it is excited by gradients of the incident ﬁeld then the quadrupole moment itself is a
function of the derivative of the electric ﬁeld, i.e. Q = Q(∂E/∂r). Since, as motivated above,
the quadrupole moment itself enters the equation in combination with a ﬁrst derivative of
the electric ﬁeld, this MM will deﬁnitely require spatially dispersive material parameters to
describe the light propagation through it. However, it should be mentioned for completeness,
that quadrupole moments in meta-atoms can be induced without a gradient of the incident
ﬁeld. Consider, e.g., a meta-atom consisting of two small spheres with permittivities of dif-
ferent sign (e.g. a dielectric and a metal sphere). An incident ﬁeld propagating perpendicular
to the connection line of the spheres will induce electric dipoles in the spheres that are out
of phase, independently on the frequency and therewith on the variation of the ﬁeld over the
spheres. Therefore, even without a gradient of the ﬁeld along the spatial extension of the
meta-atom a quadrupole moment can be excited. Thus, the resulting MM can be described
by local material parameters; especially by a non-vanishing magneto-electric coupling term
κ(ω) [178, 200, 203]. However, in the case of amorphous MMs, an isotropic response of the
meta-atom is desired to assure for a pronounced response of the MM, as will be motivated
in Sec. 2.4.3. Therefore, in this thesis the focus is on isotropic meta-atoms which have at
least three orthogonal mirror planes. It can be shown that such meta-atoms do not yield
electro-magnetic coupling, i.e. κ(ω) = 0 [204]. Consequently, for all meta-atoms discussed
