2 Theoretical background
31
(A) 
(B) 
e(w)? 
m(w)? 
Scattered 
Figure 2.6: Diﬀerent concepts on how light propagation in amorphous MMs can be described. In
(A) the incident ﬁeld causes scattered ﬁelds of all amorphously arranged meta-atoms. All scattered
ﬁelds and the multiple scattering events between diﬀerent meta-atoms are taken into account. The
idea is to simplify the description by replacing all meta-atoms by a slab made of an homogeneous
material (doted line). Then the remaining task is the assignment of eﬀective material parameters
to this material, as shown in (B). These eﬀective material parameters describe the reﬂection and
transmission of the incident ﬁeld on the MM slab.
atom consists of the external incident ﬁeld and, in addition, of the scattered ﬁelds from all
remaining meta-atoms. The self-consistent solution of this problem requires a consideration
of the precise position and orientation of every meta-atom that is illuminated by the incident
ﬁeld. Since the meta-atoms are assumed to have sub-wavelength dimensions, a huge number
of them is usually illuminated. Furthermore, as mentioned previously, the meta-atoms are
supposed to have a complicated geometry not just consisting of a single NPs to assure the
desired optical response. Consequently, the correct description of light propagation through
amorphous MMs is a highly complex and challenging task with the computational resources
that are available today. Indeed, for reasonable sized material volumes this is not possible
at all. Therefore, the eﬀective description of the light propagation in amorphous MMs is not
just scientiﬁc but rather a practical requirement to study optical eﬀects in these materials.
2.4.1 Eﬀective material parameters and spatial dispersion
The idea how to describe light propagation in amorphous MMs more eﬀectively is shown in
Fig. 2.6 (B). Instead of a self-consistent solution of the scattering problem, as in Fig. 2.6
(A), the entire MM is assumed to act as a homogeneous material to which eﬀective material
parameters can be assigned. This concept is identical to periodically arranged meta-atoms
that are commonly achieved by top-down fabrication techniques. The advantage of such a
periodicity, however, is the possibility to introduce periodic boundary conditions between
the meta-atoms. This reduces the complexity of the simulation, in principle, to a single
meta-atom. Furthermore, the Bloch theorem and the corresponding Bloch eigenmodes can
be used to describe and understand the light propagation in these periodic MMs [191–194].
