2 Theoretical background
27
Therefore, the coupling between two of these spheres can be discussed on dipole-dipole
interaction models.
A famous example is the hybridization model that is adapted from
molecular physics [173, 174] and will be discussed in detail in Chap. 3. It allows predicting
the resonance positions of two coupled spheres or other symmetric objects.
In Fig. 2.3
(C) and (D) two examples of coupled spheres are shown. The so-called dimer structure is
illuminated perpendicularly to the connection line of the spheres [Fig. 2.3 (C)] and parallel to
it [Fig. 2.3 (D)]. The perpendicular illumination shows a shift of the maximal scattering cross
section to longer wavelengths compared to the single sphere LSPR of Fig. 2.3 (B). As for the
single sphere the scattering can be fully described by that of an electric dipole. The shift of
the resonance wavelength in Fig. 2.3 (C) is in line with the predictions of the hybridization
model. The only possible oscillation of the electric dipoles of the two spheres for the highly
symmetric illumination is shown by the black dashed arrows in Fig. 2.3 (C). Both dipoles
are oscillating in phase along the connection line of the spheres [175]. Considering dipole-
dipole interaction the resonance frequency for such a conﬁguration of dipoles is shifted to
longer wavelengths compared to the single dipole resonance [173, 174]. Exactly this can
be observed in Fig. 2.3 (C). However, an additional resonance appears in Fig. 2.3 (C) at
around 550 nm. This so-called higher order resonance is not covered by simple dipole-dipole
interaction models. These resonances occur for small sphere separations. The higher order
resonances stem from the coupling of higher order multipole moments of the single spheres
[174, 176]. Although the origin of the resonance at 550 nm might be more complex the
scattering response of the entire dimer can be fully described by that of an electric dipole.
This conclusion shows one further advantage of the multipole analysis.
The last example shown in Fig. 2.3 (D) oﬀers a more complex scenario. The illumination
of the two spheres parallel to the connection line allows the excitation of an out of phase
oscillation of both dipoles [as again sketched by the black dashed arrows in Fig. 2.3 (D)].
Regarding to the dipole-dipole interaction a π out of phase oscillation of both electric dipoles
should occur at slightly longer wavelengths compared to the LSPR wavelength [173, 174].
Obviously, such an out of phase oscillation should cause a magnetic dipole moment of the
entire dimer.
The resonance of the magnetic dipole can be seen in Fig. 2.3 (D) at 610
nm. The broadband contribution of the electric dipole moment stems from the diﬀerent
strength of the electric dipoles in both spheres. Therefore, even a π out of phase oscillation
yields a net electric dipole moment. The inﬂuence of this electric dipole moment can be
decreased by using spheres of diﬀerent size, as shown in [177]. Furthermore, a signiﬁcant
contribution of an electric quadrupole moment can be observed close to the magnetic dipole
resonance wavelength. This quadrupole contribution is usually neglected in dipole-dipole
interaction models.
However, it is of major importance if eﬀective material parameters
should be assigned to a MM made by these meta-atoms [178, 179], as will be discussed in
Sec. 2.4.1.
