2 Theoretical background
16
into the eigenmodes of the Helmholtz equation. An analytical solution of this equation is
possible in eleven coordinate systems [134], such as, e.g., spherical or Cartesian coordinates.
These coordinate systems are known to allow a separation of coordinates for the Laplace
operator.
The appropriate choice of the coordinate system (and therewith the resulting
eigenmodes) depends on the the geometrical shape of the scatterer. The expansion of the
electric and magnetic ﬁelds into a chosen set of eigenmodes Aj of the Helmholtz equation
reads as [135]
E(r, ω) =
X
j
cj(ω)Aj(r, ω) ,
H(r, ω) =
X
j
dj(ω)Aj(r, ω) ,
(2.9)
with the complex expansion coeﬃcients cj and dj of the electric and magnetic ﬁeld, respec-
tively. In Cartesian coordinates the eigenmodes are simply plane waves [52]
A
pw
j (r, ω) = exp [ikj(ω)r] .
(2.10)
Inserting the ﬁeld decomposition of Eq. 2.9 for plane waves as eigenmodes into the Helmholtz
equation (Eq. 2.7) yields the dispersion relation of these modes in a local, isotropic, homo-
geneous, linear medium
k2
j(ω) = ω2
c2 ˆε(ω)µ(ω) .
(2.11)
The dispersion relation links the material properties ˆε, µ to the characteristics that describe
the spatial evolution of the plane waves, i.e. the wavevector k. From now on, for the rest
of the thesis every quantity is given in frequency space, if nothing else is explicitly stated.
Therefore, we omit the frequency ω as explicit argument and quantities in frequency space
are no longer denoted by a bar. Furthermore, the generalized permittivity ˆε is simply written
as ε.
It has been shown that Maxwell’s equations can be reduced to the Helmholtz equation
for linear, local, isotropic and homogeneous materials.
The Helmholtz equation can be
solved in homogeneous space by an expansion of the ﬁelds into eigenmodes.
Now, the
scattering problem as introduced in Fig. 2.1 should be solved.
Therefore, the boundary
conditions between the homogeneous scatterer and the surrounding needs to be speciﬁed. In
a preliminary step the electric and magnetic ﬁelds are decomposed into three parts
E(r) = Einc(r) + Esca(r) + Eint(r) ,
H(r) = Hinc(r) + Hsca(r) + Hint(r) ,
(2.12)
which are the incident ﬁelds Einc, Hinc illuminating the scatterer and the scattered ﬁelds
Esca, Hsca deﬁned in the surroundings as well as the internal ﬁelds Eint, Hint deﬁned inside
the scatterer. They are connected to each other by the boundary conditions at the surface
