2 Theoretical background
35
This term is zero if the meta-atoms are arranged on a cubic lattice [205]. For each meta-
atom inside the sphere another meta-atom on the cubic lattice can be found that chancels
the electric dipole ﬁeld at the center of the sphere (where the chosen meta-atom is located).
Obviously, the same can be done for an amorphous arrangement of the meta-atoms. As long
as the sphere has macroscopic dimensions one will ﬁnd two meta-atoms inside the sphere
that chancel their dipole ﬁelds at the center of the sphere. The same decomposition as in
Eq. 2.38 can be done for the local magnetic ﬁeld Hloc. For the interpretation of the three
terms the electric dipole moment has to be replaced by the magnetic dipole moment.
From now on only meta-atoms with an isotropic response are considered. The more general
anisotropic case is discussed later on in Sec. 2.4.3. If the scattered ﬁeld of the meta-atom
is fully described by electric and magnetic dipole moments (as claimed previously), the
following relations between the local electric ﬁeld and the dipole moments can be drawn
p(ω) = ε0αe(ω)Eloc(r = 0, ω) ,
m(ω) = 1
Z0
αm(ω)Eloc(r = 0, ω) .
(2.39)
The two scalar quantities αe and αm are the electric and magnetic polarizability, respectively.
It is important to note that the response of the meta-atom is assumed to oﬀer no magneto-
electric coupling, i.e. the electric dipole moment is solely excited by the incident electric ﬁeld
and vice versa for the magnetic terms. This restriction is perfectly suitable for all discussed
meta-atoms of this thesis, but of course it can be lifted, as shown in [205–208]. The Clausius-
Mossotti relation links these polarizabilities of the chosen meta-atom to eﬀective material
parameters (εeﬀ, µeﬀ) of the entire MM in the following way [52]
εeﬀ(ω) = εext(ω) · 3εext(ω) + 2nαe(ω)
3εext(ω) −nαe(ω) ,
µeﬀ(ω) = µext(ω) · 3µext(ω) + 2nαm(ω)
3µext(ω) −nαm(ω) ,
(2.40)
where εext and µext are the permittivity and permeability of the surrounding, respectively
and n is the number density of the meta-atoms.
In conclusion, the Clausius-Mossotti relation seems to be suitable to describe the light
propagation through amorphous MMs on the base of eﬀective material parameters. The
multipole analysis of meta-atoms, as presented in Sec. 2.3 yields the dipole moments of the
scattered ﬁeld of a single meta-atom. Furthermore, the inﬂuence of higher order moments on
the scattered ﬁeld can be investigated. If solely dipole moments contribute to the scattered
ﬁeld, the polarizabilities of the meta-atom can be obtained by Eq. 2.39. Finally, the Clausius-
Mossotti relation (Eq. 2.40) links these polarizabilities to eﬀective material parameters of
the entire MM.
The possibility to assign eﬀective material parameters in such a way is discussed now by
an representative example, namely the cut-plate pair as discussed in Sec. 2.3. The multipole
