2 Theoretical background
34
in this thesis the quadrupole moment can only be excited by a gradient of the electric ﬁeld.
Finally, the existence of a quadrupole moment of the single meta-atom directly yields spatial
dispersion of the entire MM.
To sum up this somehow sketchy discussion of electric quadrupole moments and spatial
dispersion, the following points are important. An electric quadrupole moment of a meta-
atom is an undesired property if the resulting MM should be described by simple material
parameters as in Eq. 2.36 that are not spatially dispersive. Concerning amorphous MMs,
higher order multipole moments (except electric and magnetic dipole moments) are the only
physical origin of spatial dispersion. The multipole analysis, as introduced in Sec. 2.3, is a
very beneﬁcial and powerful tool. It reveals how the meta-atoms can be fully described by
dipole moments and if the entire amorphous MM can be treated as a homogeneous material
with simple constitutive relations as in Eq. 2.36.
2.4.2 Clausius-Mossotti relation
In the following discussion it is assumed that the MM of interest is build up by meta-atoms
that can be fully described by electric and magnetic dipole moments. Based on the Clausius-
Mossotti relation a formalism is introduced that allows the description of the resulting MM
by an eﬀective permittivity εeﬀand eﬀective permeability µeﬀ. In other words, it is described
how the material parameters of an eﬀective slab, as shown in Fig. 2.6 (B), can be derived
from the known dipole moments of the meta-atom.
The basic idea of the Clausius-Mossotti relation is the following. It is assumed that the
amorphous MM can be described by eﬀective material parameters. A single meta-atom of
this MM is selected. Around this meta-atom a sphere of macroscopic dimensions is removed
from the MM. Here, macroscopic dimensions refers to a sphere with a radius that is a multiple
of the incident wavelength. So the precise positions of the meta-atoms of the remaining MM
close to the sphere surface have no eﬀect. The local electric ﬁeld Eloc at the origin of the
meta-atom is decomposed into three independent parts according to [52]
Eloc(r) = Einc(r) + EP(r) + Ei(r) .
(2.38)
The ﬁeld Einc is the external incident electric ﬁeld. The second term EP accounts for the
ﬁeld that is generated by charges on the boundary between the sphere (around the chosen
meta-atom) and the remaining MM. Consider a MM that oﬀers only a response to an electric
ﬁeld, i.e. εeﬀ̸ = 1 and µeﬀ= 1. Such a material is described by an electric dipole density
P. Removing a sphere from such a material induces a homogeneous electric dipole density
inside the sphere. For a perfect sphere a simple relation between P and EP can be derived,
namely EP = P/(3ε0). The last term in the above equation, Ei describes the ﬁeld that is
generated by the electric dipole moments of all the remaining meta-atoms inside the sphere.
