2 Theoretical background
32
This allows a precise discussion if (and under which circumstances) the assumption of a MM
as a homogeneous material with eﬀective material parameters is possible.
Here, in the case of amorphous MMs a diﬀerent concept is established. One common form
of eﬀective material parameters that can be introduced for a local MM is based on the so-
called bi-isotropic constitutive relations. The idea of locality is important. It suggests that
the electromagnetic ﬁeld at a speciﬁc position induces a polarisation of the material solely
at this position. The local response is important to assure the applicability of the standard
boundary conditions (cf. Eq. 2.13). The bi-isotropic constitutive relations read as [195]
D(k, ω) = ε0ε(ω)E(k, ω) + i
cκ(ω)H(k, ω) ,
B(k, ω) = µ0µ(ω)H(k, ω) −i
cκ(ω)E(k, ω) ,
(2.36)
where κ(ω) accounts for the magneto-electric coupling. In contrast to the previously intro-
duced constitutive relations (cf. Eq. 2.3), they are given in frequency and spatial frequency
domain. This highlights the fact that none of the material parameters depends on k which
means they are not spatially dispersive. Spatial dispersion is an unwanted property. If the
material parameters would depend on k this would cause a non-local response in the real
space. Obviously, additional boundary conditions are required for a non-local response [178].
These additional boundary conditions are controversially discussed [196] and therefore, spa-
tial dispersion should be suppressed. It has to be mentioned that the most general case of
constitutive relations that assure standard boundary conditions are bi-anisotropic constitu-
tive relations. Then, all material parameters in Eq. 2.36 become tensors. The case of an
anisotropic response is of minor interest when investigating amorphous MMs. An amorphous
spatial alignment of meta-atoms yields an isotropic response, as will be outlined later on in
Sec. 2.4.3. Therefore, solely the isotropic case is considered here. Now, the diﬀerent mecha-
nisms that cause spatial dispersion are brieﬂy discussed. They are important to appreciate
the advantage of bottom-up MMs when compared to top-down structures. General rules on
how the scattering response of a single meta-atom should look like are derived. Afterwards,
the assignment of eﬀective material parameters to amorphous MMs is introduced.
Two basic mechanisms can cause spatial dispersion in a MM. The ﬁrst one is related to
a perfect periodic alignment of the meta-atoms.
This is typically achieved by top-down
fabrication techniques where meta-atoms are periodically arranged into single layers. Thus,
the entire MM forms a grating and its optical response is described by a few propagating
diﬀraction orders. Obviously this causes a strong dependency of the optical response on the
propagation direction of the light, which is spatial dispersion. Even for sub-wavelength grat-
ings that only sustain a zeroth diﬀraction order to be propagative, the periodic alignment is
problematic [197]. Here the near-ﬁelds between adjacent meta-atoms can resonantly couple
to each other which may cause in most of the cases a dependency of the material parameters
